The Joe Rogan experience. The problem you identified though,
or just a moment ago was that, um, if people identify with their beliefs,
that is the, the, the, the specific, um,
say political platforms like on immigration, abortion, you know,
civil rights, whatever. Um, those,
those are sort of secondary to the deeper core moral values that people hold.
I define myself as a liberal, I define myself as a conservative, Republican,
whatever. And so when you attack one little thing here, well, you know, I,
I agree with you on this and this and this, but you know, on the abortion thing,
I think you're wrong. And here's why, you know, the, the impulses. Well,
but if I give, if I gave up on that one,
then I'm going to lose all these other ones. And then I've,
I've given up my identity, right? So like when I used to debate creationists,
intelligent design theorists, and so on, you know, I could tell that it,
you know, if I give people a choice,
like you have to choose between Jesus and Darwin for your life, you know,
they're not picking Darwin. Okay. Because, you know,
there's this sort of belief in their Christian dogmas about Jesus.
That is their core being who cares about Darwin and, you know,
whoever the scientist was. But if I say, keep Jesus, keep your whole religion.
I don't care what you believe, but the science is really good on this.
And here's why you should follow the facts and you don't have to give up
anything for it. And it was like, oh, okay. I'll, I'll listen. Right? So,
and like with more recently with climate change, um, you know, most people,
most of us don't know much about climate science. It's a technical science,
the models are super complex. People send me these papers.
I don't really understand them, you know, but, but if you self identify, say,
as a conservative,
then climate change is just a proxy for something else.
Like I believe in free markets and free enterprise and I'm pro
business and those guys over there, you know,
they want to attack that now. Unfortunately,
Al gore his success with his film and books and so forth, um,
then affiliated climate science with a left wing liberal cause
therefore conservatives have to go against it,
even though neither side knows all that much about climate science it's becomes
something else that you identify yourself as.
So we have to take that out of the formula.
Like you keep your worldview that you define yourself as don't give up that,
but just follow the facts on these specific issues. Yeah.
The polarization is the thing it's right.
If you are on one side,
you have to subscribe to the whole menu of ideas. And if you like,
if you're left wing, you can't really be pro-life. You know, and if you're,
if you're right wing, you,
you're supposed to have some certain amount of skepticism about.
Climate change, right?
So when somebody publicly signals where they stand on,
say climate change, um, well, what they're really saying is look, I'm,
I am publicly declaring my commitment to my team. Yes.
Yes. That's an it problem. Right? That's a problem.
The virtue signaling the comp the, the, the, the,
these saying I have loyalty to this position because of this is my
tribe.
That's right. And,
and so a lot of cognitive science studies of reasoning shows
that we, we generally, don't reason toward finding the truth,
but defending positions that are part of our team
ideology, or sort of collective whole, and in this case,
we've been talking about left and right. But, you know, there's,
there's religious idea or economic ideologies and so on, that are part of that.
And so even if you don't know anything about it, it's a virtue signal that I'm,
I'm in that team and, you know, okay, fine. We're all on teams. That's,
that's fine. Defend your team.
But what I try to do in the book is disentangle the specific
issues. Let's just take them one by one. Like,
why can't I be personally against abortion? I don't want to do that, but I, I,
and I recognize say, Ben Shapiro's arguments for the rights of the fetus,
but I also think we have conflicting moral values there,
the rights of a woman and, and the history of the way women have been treated.
And men have always tried to Lord it,
order over women's reproductive choices historically.
And this has always led to bad things like infanticide and, uh,
back alley abortions and so on. So I got an air on one side or the other,
you know, I,
I recognize and acknowledge your arguments are really good Ben or whoever is a
pro-lifer, but I still hold this position.
I think there's a lot of progress that can be made socially to
kind of reduce the tension. When you say, I acknowledge your position,
I understand it. You know, steel man in the argument.
And then the person on the other side feels like, well,
at least this guy is listening to me.
Yeah. Well, I think that's a,
that is the best topic when it comes to that,
because it's when you get to particularly, we get to late term abortions. Boy,
that's a very hard thing to defend morally and ethically.
And it's also one of the things about the abortion topic is that it's so
uniquely human in that it's such a messy topic.
It's not, there's not like here's a clear one, don't murder people, right.
Don't just go up to people and murder and everyone's like, yeah, yeah.
That's clean. That's, that's a, that's a clean subject.
Abortion is not that clean. Like when is it? Okay?
Is it okay when the fetus is not a fetus, when it's just a bundle of cells?
Most people like, yeah. Well, it's not even, it's not really anything then.
Well, it will become a person though. When, when do we decide, well,
that's such a messy subject and it's such a human subject.
And I like you. Uh, I am on the side of pro-choice.
And I think that it is the woman's choice to decide whether or not she wants to
keep the baby. But I also recognize that a certain point in time,
that choice becomes very different.
The choice becomes very different when it's a six month old fetus, like,
what is, what are we saying there? If you, if you are just,
I am pro choice period. Okay.
Are you pro choice up until the day of birth? Like when do you back it off?
When do you back it off? And it,
it is a subject that people do not want to breach. They don't want to touch it.
And, um, particular,
particularly people on the left when it comes to deciding when it's okay.
And when it's not okay,
because they feel like this is angling towards an elimination of a woman's right
to choose. And it angles towards this.
It's very difficult conversation where you,
you recognize that there is a difference between someone who's seven months
pregnant and someone who's seven days pregnant. There's a very,
very big difference. And if we can't acknowledge that, then we're being tribal.
We're being ideologically driven where we're sticking to our position,
because we feel like if we concede that this is a complex
issue, then we open up the door to possibly losing a woman's right.
To choose and losing these reproductive rights.
Yeah. I think part of the problem also is that we tend to dichotomize.
Most moral issues is right or wrong, good or evil.
And [inaudible] the problem is that the law has to draw the line somewhere.
We have to have a law and to get along and so forth.
So we have to say the drinking age is this. Instead of that,
or driving age is this.
And the point at which you're going to have abortion is right here. But most,
most of life is much more on a spectrum, a continuum. So I, here,
I make the distinction in the book between binary thinking and continuous
thinking, most moral issues are on a continuum. You know, like immigration, uh,
you know, it's like we closed the borders. What don't let anybody in ever. No,
no, no. We gotta let send, man. Okay. Then we should open the borders.
You mean you want to just open the borders up and let everybody in? No, no, no.
I'm not saying everybody. Okay. Where do you draw the line? Right.
And it's another.
Messy human subject.
Yeah. Yeah. But, but if you think of it like, well,
it's a continuum instead of a binary choice and, you know, whatever answer,
it's not just right or wrong, good or evil,
that there's different places to set the, uh, the, the dial.
So some,
and here the comparative method of looking at what different countries do as
experiments, thinking of those as experiments like the, you know,
Japan has a very tight, you know, they they've slid it way down here.
They let almost nobody in Australia is a little looser, but, but,
but tighter than us and so on.
And you kind of look at the consequences of letting this many people in or that
many people and see what it does. Of course, all countries are different.
Some are more diverse, some are more homogeneous. You have to account for that.
And on and on. So here, I think, you know,
instead of thinking of it in these kind of polarized black and white, you know,
that it's either this or that. And if you're on this side,
then you're on the bad side, you know, that that's not helpful.
So instead of binary thinking, continuous thinking abortion,
certainly you just articulated it perfectly. I mean, seven days of come on,
you know, it's just a bundle of cells, but now it looks like, you know,
by 20 weeks or so feel pain. You know, the, some consciousness comes online,
you know, around 24 weeks, 25 weeks, you know,
at some point you gotta draw the line somewhere around there. Now, scientists,
of course they don't want to put lines anywhere. It's a, it's a day by day,
week by week, day by day, even hour by hour.
If the development of the connectome that creates thought and so on,
there's no good place, but we have to have a line somewhere.
So the law has to do that, but that then forces us into that binary thinking,
which is not helpful.
And it, it creates this. This is like the line in the sand,
this polarization line between these two sides.
And I think that so much of what people subscribe to when they
do choose an ideology, once they choose an ideology,
they S they have this conglomeration of ideas that they adopt and they
adopt in order to be accepted by the tribe. And it's,
this is also a very unique aspect of human communication and civilization that
we, we have to adhere to the principles and the ideologies of that tribe.
So you just take on all these thoughts,
and it's one of the real problems with only having two choices in this country
when it comes to politics and when it comes to just styles of life, you know,
and there's so many people that take great relish in switching teams too,
which is interesting, right? It's like I was a liberal my whole life.
And then one day I woke up and realized I was being a moron, you know,
and now I'm a pro second amendment pro Trump Maga make America
great. Keep America great.
It's interesting because those are sometimes the most, uh, the,
the most passionate supporters of the new side,
whether they're they're newly liberal or newly conservative, or, you know,
w some of the people that are the most interesting to talk to are people that
used to be vegans and are now carnivore. They're just, they just eat meat.
And I was realizing I was being a fool and like, oh my God, it's,
it's the same thing it's with it's with almost every style of
living. You can find a contrary style that people find appealing. You know,
there's people that used to be atheist to become Muslims. And they, they, they,
they were, you know, the hijab and they, they fully adhered to the Koran.
It's really, really interesting because I I've spent a lot of time
watching, uh, religious scholars online, uh,
talk and watching them preach and watch. And there's something.
And as a person, who's very agnostic. When I watched that,
it's appealing to me,
there's a certain aspect of the confidence that they have when they're talking
about what God wants or what, you know,
what a law has in store for you when you die or what you should do,
because it's written in this particular religious texts that confidence that
they have when they describe these things is very alluring. Even to me,
it's not like I'm going to join,
but I'm sitting there in front of my computer and I'm recognizing, oh,
I see the appeal here. Like, it's not, it's not that it's working on me,
but it's attractive to me. I see it.
I see how this works on people.
And I find it incredibly fascinating. And I think it has to,
it has to have some sort of an evolutionary reason.
There's some sort of an evolutionary benefit that adhering and
being accepting of the morals and the ethics and the ideology of the
tribe is that that's how you stay alive.
That's how you find other like-minded people that stick with you.